---
title: Debian Jessie, Screen resolution, and VirtualBox Guest Additions
date: 2014-05-04 18:00
...

Debian Jessie, Screen resolution, and VirtualBox Guest Additions
================================================================

I decided to upgrade to Debian Jessie, to take advantage of the newer
packages available, mainly the new GHC version. Initially I wanted to
upgrade from my current Wheezy, but I faced problems with the screen
resolution. I thought that had something to do with a bad upgrade, I did
something wrong while upgrading, so I decided to do a fresh install. To
my surprise, I met with the same issue.

For the record this is the system I’m running now:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
$ uname -a
Linux debian-gsoc 3.13-1-amd64 #1 SMP Debian 3.13.10-1 (2014-04-15) x86_64 GNU/Linux
```

The problem
-----------

The issue was that the screen resolution was not right. Previously I
managed to get 1920x1080, which is my native resolution. But after
installing Jessie, I could only get 1240x768, that’s not good at all.
`xrandr -q` says something like `failed to get size of output default`.

Steps to solving
----------------

I researched about it, and found many suggested solutions, most had to
do with editing `/etc/X11/xorg.conf`. Those didn’t work for me at all,
and I figure that was because I was running on VirtualBox. The magical
search term was this

> debian wheezy virtualbox resolution

which led me to [this forum
post](https://forums.virtualbox.org/viewtopic.php?f=7&t=44117).

The OP faced a problem with screen resolution on his guest os as well,
and there are replies that mention an old VirtualBox Guest Additions.
Apparently Debian Jessie ships with a version of Guest Additions, but it
isn’t the lastest one.

My take away was to try to install Guest Additions, and see what
happens. [This
post](www.binarytides.com/virtualbox-guest-additions-debian-wheezy/) was
extremely helpful. I ignored the part on `lsmod` and skipped straight to
`apt-get install build-essentials module-assistant`. I then got stuck at
running `VBoxLinuxAdditions.run` - I couldn’t mount the cdrom.

More problems
-------------

The simplest way to mount the cdrom onto your guest os is to go to the
VirtualBox window, click on `Devices > Insert Guest Additions CD Image`,
but somehow that didn’t work for me. Click that didn’t see to have any
effect, my `/media/cdrom` was still empty. I decided to mount the cdrom
manually.

Success!
--------

I got most of the information from [VirtualBox’s official
manual](www.virtualbox.org/manual/ch04.html#idp55231856). Basically it
involved me going to the VirtualBox window, selecting
`Devices > CD/DVD Devices > Choose a virtual CD/DVD disk file...` and
then navigate to `C:\Program Files\Oracle\VirtualBox`. Substitute that
for wherever you installed VirtualBox.

After that I manually mounted the cdrom, with help from
[nixcraft](www.cyberciti.biz/faq/mounting-cdrom-in-linux/), and ran the
file

    # mount /dev/cdrom /media/cdrom
    # /media/cdrom/VBoxLinuxAdditions.run

Wait a couple of minutes and rebooted, and now everything is fine!
`xrandr -q` now gives me many more options, including 1920x1080, and I
happily selected that using `xrandr --output VBOX0 --mode 1920x1080`.

The initial reason why I decided to virtualize was because of UEFI
issues, and because virtualization has less problems. Today’s challenges
has made me realize how it is difficult to pinpoint where the problem
lies, because technology is so complex now. But still, a simple
installation leading to so much convenience, I’ll definitely remember
this lesson!
