title: NOC New York Module Credits mapping for SoC
date: 2015-01-02 16:30
Category: NOC
Tags: noc, nus, soc
Slug: noc-soc-mc-mapping

*NOC is a big deal, so you'll probably have questions. This hopefully-series of articles serves to tell you more about a SOC student going on NOC in New York. Hope this helps you, feel free to drop me suggestions/questions at ngzhian@nus.edu.sg*

In one year, you should be able to clear 40 MCs in order to be MC-neutral<sup>1</sup>.
For my batch we are able to clear up to **32 MCs** because we do not have discipline-based module<sup>2</sup>

Here's how I allocated my MCs (Computer Science):

| Module Code |  Name | MCs | Map to |
|-----------|---------------------------------------|-------|---|
|	TR3101	|	Internship Continuous assessment	|	4 	|	Internship |
|	TR3102	|	Internship Program Report			|	8	|	Internship |
|	TR3103	|	Start up Business case				|	8	|	ULR |
|	TR3002	|	New Venture Creation				|	4 	|	UEM |
|	MG2304	|	Marketing							|	4 	|	UEM |
|	TRXXXX	|	TBC<sup>3</sup>						|	4 	|	UEM |

For **CS** students, <code>TR3101</code> and <code>TR3102</code> can go towards clearing our [program requirements](http://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/undergraduates/cs_cs_2012_13.html)

> Either<br/>
> CP4101 BComp Dissertation<br/>
> or<br/>
> Complete 12 MCs by taking CS modules at level-4000 or above, or modules approved by the Department of Computer Science<br/>
> or<br/>
> 12 MCs of Industrial Experience Training.

For **IS/EC** students, they can map IS4010 Industry Internship Programme (equivalent to 12-MC FYP or 3 IS modules) to NOC (TR3101 and TR3102). The other TR module confirmed is TR2202 Technological Innovation. (Thanks Jason for this!)

Check the requirements for your cohort to be sure.

Recall that the breakdown of ULR is
- 8 MCs on GEM
- 4 MCs on SS
- 8 MCs on Breadth

so <code>TR3103</code> essentially completes my ULR requirement.

The remaining 3 modules (<code>TR3002</code>, <code>MG2304</code>, <code>TRXXXX</code>) maps to my UE, which has a cap of 20 MCs. This means that for you to be MC neutral, you should not have taken more than 2 UEs thus far.

## What about the 8 MCs left?
<code>40 - 32 = 8MCs</code>, so at the end of NOC I would have 8 MCs I need to clear.

In my case, I haven't taken a single UE yet, so this 8 MCs will be used on UEs. I took Orbtial (a summer module) in Year 1, so that clears 4 MCs. I plan to overload 1 module in my final year, so that I can make 160 MCs and graduate in 4 years.

## Need more info?
Shoot me a question ngzhian@nus.edu.sg

<sup>1</sup> this means to not take more modules than necessary

<sup>2</sup> reasons are not easy to explain, and this might change for your batch

<sup>3</sup> module not confirmed but can definitely map it to UE
