title: Notes on "Thinking Forth"
date: 2013-03-03 18:00

Notes on "Thinking Forth"
=========================

I saw a mention of [Thinking
Forth](http://thinking-forth.sourceforge.net/) online sometime back, and
downloaded it. I finally got down to reading it this lazy Sunday
afternoon, and made some notes. To quote from the homepage

> Thinking Forth is a book about the philosophy of problem solving
> and programming style, applied to the unique programming language
> [Forth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forth_(programming_language)).

What I feel after reading this book is that many concepts and tips
taught in the book can actually be applied to which ever programming
langugage you are using now. Here are some general notes that I have
made.

Component Programming
---------------------

**Component programming** is about *minimizing* the impact of any
change. A component is a resource, which can be a piece of hardware or a
software resource (such as a queue or stack). This idea is in contrast
to Sequential or Hierachical Design. An example was given by the author:
updating a record. However when designing by components, we think in
terms of the components which describe the structure of the records,
provide a set of editing commands, and provide read/write methods to
storage.

Analysis
--------

Thinking Forth talks about the **Nine Phases of the Programming Cycle**,
I took special note of the first two: discovering requirements and
constraints, and building a conceptual model of the solution. To build a
conceptual model, we can follow these steps:

1. Define interfaces By
using Data Flow Diagrams for example.
2. Define rules By using English,
Decision Tree, Tables. And subsequently simplify the rules so that it
can be easily understood and coded
3. Define data structures. This is a
description of the structures’ conceptual model, i.e. what attributes to
keep.

Problem Solving
---------------

These are general ways we can use to approach problem solving. -
Determine you goal - Picture the problem as a whole - Develop a plan
(e.g. work backwards) - Step back from the problem - Believe

I found **Believe** to be exceptionally inspiring. To achieve success
you first need to believe you can succeed.

Naming
------

As a pretty well-known quote goes

> The 2 hardest things in Computer Science are naming things,
> cache-invalidation, and off-by-one errors.

Thinking Forth gives some tips on naming things, though some may
actually be more relevant for the Forth language itself. - Choose names
according to “what”, not “how” - Choose names that work in phrases -
Spell names in full - Favour shorter words

I feel that naming is a *balancing act*. On one hand you want the names
to be *expressive*, but you also want them to be *concise*. For certain
local variables, especially array indices, it makes sense not to give
them long names; you will be typing them a lot, and they will not matter
once you return from the function, so naming them `i` is fine. For
variables with a bigger scope, the name `data` could mean a lot of
different things.

Factoring
---------

Factoring is about organizing code into useful fragments by separating
reusable parts from non-reusable parts. We can work to factor out:
- Data
- Functions
- Code within Control Structures
- Names After factoring, make sure that the factored code serves a single purpose, if
not the refactoring might just have made things worse.

Minimizing Control Structures
-----------------------------

The rationale behind this is that control structures introduce
complexity into the code, and makes it harder to read and maintain. This
rationale is clearly demonstrated in an example given by the author,
where there is a *heptly-nested* (6 levels) `if-else` flow. The author
suggests a few ways to minimize control structures:

- Do not test for something that has already executed
- Combine booleans of similar weight
- When conditions do not share similar weight, place conditions that are
easier to calculate, or least likely to be true on the outside.
- Choose control structures that closely matches the control-flow

Closing Thoughts
----------------

I read through the book quite quickly, and skipped the parts which I
felt was about Forth, because I was more interested in the concepts
taught than the language. However many concepts introduced are based on
what Forth provides, and how Forth works. As such, I think that learning
Forth while you are going through this book will greatly increase the
value gained from reading. Nonetheless, I gained a lot of valuable
insights from Thinking Forth, all of which I shared above, which will
definitely help me in being a better programmer. I would like to thank
the author, [Leo Brodie](http://punchandbrodie.com/leo/), and [Thinking
Forth Project](http://thinking-forth.sourceforge.net/), for taking time
time and effort to make the book available for free, and in high-quality
format.
