title: CS2101 - Should news agency ask Google to pay up?
date: 2013-03-04 18:00

CS2101 - Should news agency ask Google to pay up?
=================================================

Case
----

Brazil’s National Association of Newspaper asks Google to pay up to post
the headlines of their news articles. The NAN’s claim is that because
Google currently uses the heading of the articles, and show the first
few sentences, users are not as likely to click through to the new site
itself, because they already have the gist of the article based on the
snippet. Google’s view is that it has helped the agencies reach a bigger
audience, and has not in fact reduced the visits to their
[sites](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/10/brazilian-press-to-google-news-pay-up-or-leave-our-content-alone/ "Brazil").

French government also [proposed a
law](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/10/google-threatens-to-cut-french-media-out-of-news-search/ "France")
that requires Google to pay when the French media appear in news
searches.

And in Germany, the lower house has passed a
[bill](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/03/germany-wants-google-to-pay-for-news-citations-passes-re-printing-bill/ "Germany")
requiring search engines to pay a license fee when re-posting content
that is longer than “individual words or short exerpts”.

These three countries seem to be going against the tech giant, with the
2 agendas: protecting the copyright of published content, and
encouraging users to visit their own news sites. Google’s general stand
is not to pay, as it feels that it has helped direct more users to the
news sites, and that extensive protection of copyright will threathen
start-ups.

What I want to talk about here is whether the countries should ask for
payments from Google.

Utilitarianism
--------------

The main groups of people involved here are the news agencies, the
consumers (those who read the news), and Google. I will assume that as
companies, thew news agencies and Google have profit-maximisation as one
of their priorities. The agencies however have other goals, such as
protecting their copyright, and delivering news to a big audience.
Google’s other aim is to be the first stop for people reading news. The
consumers have a much simpler goal, to read accurate and relevant news,
at their convenience.

My view here is that by asking Google to pay up, the overall good
experienced by the stakeholders decrease. First of all, the news
agencies stand to gain. By collecting a license fee, their profits
increase, and this has a multiplier effect; they will be able to hire
better journalists, management, have better infrastructure, provide
wider and deeper coverage etc. But all that is assuming that Google
agrees to pay up. A different way that this situation can turn out is
that Google refuses to pay. In this case, it is likely that the new
agencies will suffer some consequences. UK paper *The Times* noted that
30 to 40 percent of their traffic was coming from search, and for other
news agencies, the percentage is probably at that levels too. Hence when
Google refuses, the agencies stand to lose that amount of traffic, and
that is definitely harmful for them.

For Google, if they pay, they lose money. Depending on the amount that
is to be paid, Google could lose quite a bit of money. This is because
Google crawls and displays a huge amount of different news sites, and
the number of users on Google’s services is immense. However if they
don’t pay, their news aggregation offering will be limited. Consumers
might see this as a reason to no longer use Google’s services, but jump
directly to the news site. This is likely if the consumers are from
within the country which news agencies are no longer re-published by
Google. But I would think that this is unlikely to happen, as consumers
can just turn to the many other snippets of news available from the many
other agencies that Google is still tracking.

The happiness of the consumers is a bit more tricky to be calculated.
Many consumers turn to Google because as an aggregator, it provides a
huge variety of news, from different perspectives. The headline plus
snippets combination also means that content is easily digestible. If we
assume that the cost incurred by Google is not passed down to the
consumers, the consumers will not feel it at all. They will still enjoy
this free service like they always have. However this assumption will
not likely stand as Google is not a charity. If Google refuses to pay,
consumers will lose several avenues of information. And if they depended
on those sources that are not cut off, it would be a loss for those
consumers.

It seems like the Utilitarianism views are not helping much in this
case, as it is hard to predict the way things will turn out, and also
the costs and benefits to the stakeholders are not easy to quantify and
measure.

Kantianism
----------

If we universalize this case, it gets pretty extreme. Imagine if every
company indexed by Google asks for payments, because a headline, or a
title, or a snippet is re-published. Now we will not just be talking
about Google, but about search engine in general, because they all do
the same thing that the agencies are demanding license fees for.

Asking for payments will kill small start-ups in the field of search. It
will kill innovation and will only allow the incumbent giants to thrive.
In fact if license fees get large enough, even big companies will fall.

By asking for payments, agencies risk not getting included in search
results. This is detrimental for consumers because it means that they do
not get accurate and relevant results. The only results they get will be
those that search engines do not have to pay to display.

This act is a selfish because companies only think about their own
interests and copyright but fail to think of the human population as a
whole.

Virtue Ethics
-------------

It seems like there is a conflict of values going on with the news
agencies: on one hand they want to protect their copyright, on the other
they want users on their sites and they know Google will affect that a
lot.

On first look it seems to me like the agencies value the copyright more,
which is why they went ahead with asking for payments. Perhaps they are
also encouraged by the license deal Google struck with Agence
France-Presse, and they hope to achieve both at the same time.

But from an outsider point of view, it seems like the motivation of the
agencies are profits. Given the large amount of readership and exposure
Google has brought to the new agencies, it is ironic that they still
want Google to pay up. And why should copyright be protected by
payments? The news agencies can just decline to be included in Google’s
tracker, and that will safely avoid all copyright issues. The fact that
they *offered* Google a choice to pay up clearly shows that they do not
want to be left behind.

Closing thoughts
----------------

Analyzing the consequences proved to be too complicated for me, with the
various branches that this action could result in. Universalizing this
action shows us a radical side of things, where Google has to pay every
company that appears in its search results. I also questioned the real
intentions of asking for payments, and feel that it isn’t motivated
purely by protecting copyright, but perhaps by profits.

In all I feel that asking for payments is a wrong move, and a
short-sighted ones. If the agencies were really that particular about
protecting copyright, there are other ways to do so besides asking for
payments.
