---
title: Thanksgiving 2013
date: 2013-03-02 18:00
...

Thanksgiving 2013
=================

Who do you thank?
=================

Thanksgiving is hardly, if not never, celebrated in Singapore, but it
should be. When you sit down, and spend time thinking of who to thank,
or what to thank, it makes you feel so much more, happy. You feel more
appreciative, of all the experiences you have been through, all the
people around you, all the things that you have.

Thank you dear family
---------------------

To the closest people in my life, thank you. To my **parents** for
raising me, for providing for me, for teaching me, nurturing me. There
are just so many things to thank you for. For supporting me, no matter
my decisions. To my **sister**, for your words of encouragement, for
your questions about math and science and wireless, because you make me
feel privileged that I have someone to teach and guide.

Thank you darling
-----------------

To the **girl I love**, thank you. For showing me how to love, for
loving me, for letting me love you. For the good and bad times we share.
For the many wonderful memories, some of which I have forgotten, just
because there were so many. For your constant motivation, for your care,
for being there.

Thank you friends
-----------------

To the people surrounding me, thank you. For the times we worked hard
together, for the times we enjoyed our success, and failures. To
**MAD**, thank you for the nights of practice. Being able to work hard
with a group of people sharing a common goal was really a joy. To the
**BBoys** especially, for showing me what true friends are like. For
sticking up for one another, for entertaining one another, for
wingman-ing one another. Cheers to everlasting brotherhood. To the
people in NUS, I have not known you for long, but thank you for the
study sessions, for the lunch breaks together. If not for all of you,
school will really be lonely.

What I am thankful for
----------------------

I’m thankful for being a person of good health. For being a person who
is able to pursue his interests. To not be constrained by lack of
finances. To be brought up in a non-discriminatory environment. To be
surrounded by people whom I enjoy being with, and hopefully they enjoy
being around me too. I’m thankful for being able to write and read, and
surf the net. And I thank you for reading this.
